---
layout: post
title: Week 3 (February 1-3, 2016)
---

On Monday, we will finish up our discussion of nonlinear regression by introducing the idea of transformations to fit simple parametric curves.  We will then talk about two new ideas:    
* naive prediction intervals   
* the decomposition of variance (a.k.a. the Pythagorean theorem of statistics)  

On Wednesday, we finish up any remaining material from Monday.  We will then start a discussion of multivariate statistical models (that is, models with more than one predictor). Key concepts: 
* aggregation paradoxes   
* groupwise means and dummy variables  
* modeling numerical outcomes in terms of multiple categorical predictors  
* main effects and interactions  
* the analysis of variance  


### Software

Outside of class, complete the following R walkthroughs.  
- [Utility bills versus temperature.](http://jgscott.github.io/teaching/r/utilities/utilities.html).  This covers material from last week on polynomial regression.  
- [Economic development and infant mortality.](http://jgscott.github.io/teaching/r/infmort/infmort.html)  Using transformations to fit nonlinear curves.  
- [kidney function and aging](http://jgscott.github.io/teaching/r/creatinine/creatinine.html): naive prediction intervals and the decomposition of variance  
- [reaction time in video games](http://jgscott.github.io/teaching/r/rxntime/rxntime.html): modeling numerical outcomes with more than one categorical predictor; dummy variables and interaction terms; analysis of variance.  


### Readings

Please read Chapter 3 of the course packet, along with pages 75-91 of Chapter 4.  


### Exercises  
[The exercises this week]({{ site.baseurl }}/exercises/exercises02-SDS325H.pdf) are about nonlinear regression and aggregation paradoxes.  There is also a little math problem that will have you derive the so-called method-of-moments estimator for linear regression with one variable.




